hello everyone
I had one of the most remarkable
opportunities of my life earlier this
year
on a trip to Greece I took with Ralston
College as a university new University
that I'm associated with in Savannah
Georgia
we went to Samos with the first class
for Ralston college but while I was
there I had the opportunity or the
opportunity was provided to me to go to
Turkey to the ancient town the ancient
city of Ephesus there's an old library
there which rivaled the Library of
Alexandria in the ancient world so one
of the world's first repositories of
academic knowledge and Ephesus has been
excavated it's quite a remarkable
archaeological excavation like like the
city of Pompeo a huge City Greek city
thousands of years old four thousand
years old or more all excavated I had
the opportunity to give a lecture there
on the logos from the Greek perspective
the Turkish authorities were extremely
helpful they lit up the whole city for
us at night I was able to give this
lecture to the students at Ralston
college and then publicly to all of you
in front of this ancient building this
ancient Library all lit up with
beautiful LEDs it was one of the most
spectacular things I'd ever seen and to
be on the grounds of this ancient place
to give this lecture was quite the damn
thrill I can tell you that and so you
know Western Society really derived from
two sources in some real sense two
fundamental sources suppose you could
add Rome as a third but is a Greek
stream and a judeo-christian stream and
they both developed the idea of the
logos and logos is the root word of
logic and so forget about the
judeo-christian logos for a minute on
the Greek side
there was this deep idea developed by
Greek philosophers that the world had an
intrinsic order that at the bottom of of
reality itself especially on the
objective front the more objective front
there was a palpable discernible and
benevolent order that would make itself
accessible to the imagination and
intellectual inquiry of human beings so
that we the cosmos was comprehensible
right that's a that's a great Greek
proposition and and that's the
proposition of this intrinsic logos now
on top of that was laid the
judeo-christian idea of the logos was
which was something like the notion that
the Divine element of the human being
was that of courageous
exploratory Communicator that's the
logos idea and so you can see out of the
combination of those two ideas that
something like science could emerge
because you'd have the notion that the
Universe was intelligible in its
fundamental structure that's the
intrinsic law logos of reality and then
that the human beings logos could
interact with that and produce
intelligible order and so anyways I got
to talk about the Greek idea of the
logos insofar as I understand it at the
foot of at the steps of the Ephesus
library in this absolutely beautiful
um in Locale and I'd invite you all to
to listen to the lecture and and to
enjoy it with any luck and to find it
useful and engaging it certainly was a
great privilege for me to do this it was
definitely one of the highlights of my
life
so welcome to that and Merry Christmas
it is a privilege and a pleasure to be
here on the steps of the library of
Celsius here in the ancient Greek city
of Ephesus it was here that heraclitus
first articulated the idea of the logos
as the principal and structure
underlying reality itself it was here
that the Apostle John lived and died in
the beginning was the word and so it is
appropriate that Ralston college should
come here as we seek to revive and
reinvent the university as we seek to
revive our understanding of ourselves
and of the world
it is an immense honor to welcome for
his inaugural lecture to our inaugural
class our Chancellor Dr Jordan Peterson
[Music]
[Applause]
so this is pretty good eh
so I was thinking today well and for a
long time about what I wanted to talk
about
and I guess I'm I'm trying to
I'm I'm always trying to bring together
a non-ending stream of thought that I've
been developing I would say for
for 40 years really and I thought I
would try to extend that tonight maybe
farther than I've been able to manage
before and this seems to be exactly the
right place to do it uh
in Stephen's opening remarks he
mentioned that
this geographical Locale is very tightly
associated with the emergence of the
idea of the logos particularly on the
Greek side but also as it turns out on
the Christian side and it's really
bringing together of the concepts the
Dual concepts of the logos from the
Greek and the Christian side that
produced for better worse and hopefully
for better the modern world
and so I want to walk through some ideas
that I've been developing tonight
and make comment on them
and see if I can lay them out in
something approximating
an intelligible form which would be the
right thing to do given that we're
talking about the logos
so you might think about the logos it's
worthwhile and useful to think about the
logos as something like the intrinsic
order of the cosmos of course that begs
the question in some sense well a number
of questions what do you mean by
intrinsic what do you mean by order what
do you mean by Cosmos and you can break
the cosmos down to begin with in
something
into into into into
two sub-categories
macrocosmic and microcosmic and uh
you can think about the microcosm and
the macrocosm
in a purely objective sense you could
think about the microcosm as the Hidden
World
beneath the
resolution of our vision
so of course
there's an unbelievably active world of
hidden complexity at work
at levels of resolution much higher than
we can see moving all the way down to
the quantum Realm
and as scientists we've been very good
at elucidating the nature of that
microcosm and then you can think of the
macrocosm as
the external world that extends up above
us
into the objective Cosmos itself but
there's another way of thinking about
that that brings the psychological on
board and and that is that the microcosm
is in some sense the objective material
world that beckons at higher levels of
resolution but the macrocosm is
something more conceptual and
psychological rather than something
objective and external and so that's a
good thing to keep in mind as we
um as we move forward through this
exercise in thought
another way of thinking about this so we
can hit the underlying conceptual
Target from a multitude of different
dimensions you could you could also
think that we're beset by two Mysteries
in some sense we have the world of what
matters
and the degree to which the world of
what matters is the most real is
indeterminate because it depends on how
you define reality if you define reality
as that which exists in the objective
world then the world of what matters is
not fundamental but it's my observation
that we act as if the world of what
matters is more real than the world of
matter and I think in some sense the
most compelling evidence for that
even to a skeptic and it's a pessimistic
form of evidence but it suffices
sometimes pessimistic evidence is the
most potent
the reality of pain is undeniable
and it's not amenable to rational
argumentation it announces its existence
and for a long time I think I thought in
some real sense that there was no more
fundamental reality than pain and
there's an ethical Dimension to that too
because if you accept the reality of
pain there seems to come with it an
impetus to eliminate
unnecessary pain and to some degree we
can understand that as the basis of the
moral impulse and maybe to eliminate the
unnecessary pain of of the innocent like
the unnecessary pain of children for
example and so
well we accept the existence of pain as
something so real that we will almost
instantaneously act on it and I would
say that's especially the case in the
case say of infants
and so
it isn't obvious what's real because it
depends in some sense and how you define
the term but my sense is that what
people believe is most accurately
reflected not in what they say or in the
propositions about the world they lay
out but in how they act
and so and that's also something subject
to debate but it's not a shallow
argument to say that
your belief is most deeply reflected in
your action in fact I think in some
sense it's the deepest of arguments and
you know perfectly well that you can say
one thing and do another and you also
know that you regard people who do that
as Hypocrites and you tend to regard
what they do as a more profound pointer
to what they believe than what they say
and so you'll call them on that too and
so that means that there are some
meanings that we regard as
inviolably real now the reason I
concentrated on pain is because it's
pretty easy to destroy Joy
you can do that with a rational critique
and we're quite good at that and you can
destroy faith and you can destroy hope
and you can destroy enthusiasm and you
can often do that even with a casual
word but pain is much more resistant to
that sort of rational
dismissal
I thought over the years thinking as
much as I could about
unjust pain let's say
as a fundamental reality
wondering if there is anything more real
than that and then I would say well yes
there is that which
dispels pain is more real than pain
and that's because to dispel something
you have to be more powerful than that
thing in some sense and and then you can
ask yourself at all sorts of different
levels of analysis what's capable of
dispelling pain
um or at least let's say rendering pain
acceptable which is a not perhaps as
deep a solution or as desirable a
solution but is also not nothing and I
would say that many of the things we
regard as cardinal virtues
are virtues in fact because if you have
them on your side you can in fact
contend with and perhaps dispel or
triumph over or transcend the inevitable
pain and suffering of existence and I
think one of the
fundamental purposes of Education
is to provide people with the
the peers and the
and the and the Allies to use a word
that's been contaminated so terribly
that enable them to stand up nobly
in the face of tragedy and still move
forward with what is good in mind
and that's a very different purpose than
inculcating in people
a thoroughly detailed description of the
patterns of the objective world and I'm
not saying for a moment that there's
nothing useful about the latter but the
former
is
people starve and thirst in desperation
without the former
and so and those are realities
now if as I said if you start out with
the axiomatic assumption that only what
is objective is real well then that
argument Falls flat but I think there's
no reason whatsoever not to raise the
question of what it is that you're using
to base your axiomatic definition of
reality upon and I think that
noting what people do
is a very good pointer to
the real
so here's another way of thinking about
the logos for the world to be
intelligible it must consist of
patterned regularities and that might be
the great discovery of the Greeks in
some sense that there are patterned
regularities that are superordinate to
immediate perception that are in some
sense more real so number would reflect
that for example our numbers more or
less real than the things they represent
and you can make an argument both ways
because again it depends on your
definition of real but it's a very
difficult argument to make that they're
less real and partly that's because if
you're a master of number there's almost
nothing that's beyond your grasp so as a
if your wisdom
if the depth of your wisdom is reflected
in the utility of your tools then almost
nothing makes you more powerful than to
be a master of numbers and that seems to
point to a an ability to grip some
element of a reality that's more
fundamental that is outside of immediate
perception and so one
element of the idea of the logos is that
there's an order to the world that's
superordinate to the apparent order
that's more fundamentally real and that
you can discover that order in contact
with
the world and that's the the microcosmic
world in some sense rather than the
psychological world and so
that seems useful and I would say these
patterned regularities they're of two
types there's pattern regularities of
being
and and an object is a pattern
regularity of being one of the things I
came to understand as I studied the
science of perception is that we don't
see objects we see patterns and we infer
objects and so the pattern recognition
is more fundamental than the object
recognition it's also the case by the
way that we don't just see patterns in
infer objects we see useful patterns and
infer objects and I don't mean as a
second order inference I mean as a
direct perception and so it's quite
obvious
sophisticated psychologists of
perception have noted that in some real
sense the perception of the meaning of a
phenomena phenomenon precedes the
perception of the phenomena and and I I
really mean directly and there's also
there's
much of what you see for example is very
much associated with what you can grip
because even your vision is tightly
associated with the
the act of gripping because what you
need to see is what will give you a grip
on the world and you might say you see
the thing and then determine how to grip
it but that's not how it works your
retina for example example which
represents patterns in the world
propagates those patterns through your
nervous system and manifests itself in
such things as preparation for grip and
that's outside of conscious visual
perception
and so you cannot make the case that
what you do when you perceive is poorly
an objective sense data and then sort
the world from that the neurology the
neural the neurological investigations
have rendered that presumption invalid
not only that there's another problem
well let's refer to we'll do this in two
parts for the world to be intelligible
it must consist of patterned
regularities and their regularities of
being and becoming another issue is when
you encounter the world do you see
what's there and the answer to that is
well yes but you also perceive what
could be and so I would say that what
you perceive is an amalgam of the
patterned regularities of both being and
becoming and you can think about this
and make it intelligible if you think
about what happens when you wake up in
the morning you might ask yourself well
what do you perceive when you wake up in
the morning and you open your eyes and
you might say well I perceived my
bedroom and I suppose in some very
trivial sense that's true although
generally your bedroom is so familiar
that you don't need to perceive it
you've already automatized that
perception and it has almost zero
functional utility I suppose you have to
perceive it well enough to win your way
through it when you step out of bed but
that isn't really what you perceive not
not my experience and I believe this is
a very common experience is that what
you perceive when Consciousness Dawns in
the morning is the Horizon of
possibility that's associated with the
world in front of you and so what you
really see as far as I can tell is
something directly akin to the
chaos that God encounters as the word
the logos at the beginning of time which
is there's a there's pattern regularity
of being that's a solid object because
it propagates itself across time in this
three-dimensional form but then there's
a cloud of possibility around each
object which is what
additional realities it could manifest
depending on how you act in relationship
to it and that's not only true of simple
objects because simple objects can be
many things so a a heavy drinking mug
can also be a weapon for example which
begs the question of what is that thing
it's a drinking glass and a weapon and
broken it's a knife and and many many
objects if not all have quite a wide
cloud of possibility around them and
then the interactions between objects
have a tremendously wide distribution of
possibility and that's the becoming
that's implicit in the being and I think
that's actually what you confront when
you wake up in the morning because
generally what happens is that as
Consciousness Dawns and Consciousness is
an agent that contends with being and
its potential Transformations you see a
raid in front of you a set of
indeterminate possibilities which you
could bring into being as a consequence
of your imposition of vision with some
degree of of effort and energy and what
you do in some real sense is
prioritizing rank order the importance
of the possibilities that you contend
with maybe even before you get out of
bed and I would say in some real sense
if you're not doing that
you're actually not living up to your
possibility that what we really are
rather than automated deterministic
machines and by the way we can't be that
because the future is indeterminate and
a deterministic machine cannot calculate
the proper navigation path through an
indeterminate Horizon you're a Visionary
that imposes a structure of priorities
on a horizon of possibility and that
means in some very real sense far more
than mere metaphoric that you are in
fact an embodiment of the logos and the
same thing that
manifested itself at the beginning of
existence itself and continually
manifests itself in some real sense as
that beginning in the world of your
conscious apprehension and we think of
these things as myths or as metaphors
and they are that because there are many
things but they're also reflective of
something so real that even our Notions
of objective reality in some real sense
pale in comparison and so
that's useful to know now the problem
and this is the problem with the
empirical viewpoints the empirical
Viewpoint is in some sense that what you
know you know as a consequence of sense
data and the problem with that
proposition is that
there is Mystery
embedded inside the axiomatic
presupposition of sense data so
behavioral psychologists believe that
animals and they tried to model animal
behavior using these
a priori Theory
the animal
reacted reflexively to a stimulus and so
that's a deterministic machine
hypothesis and that always bothered me
partly because animals don't do that so
for example if you train a rat to run
down a maze it'll learn how to run down
the Maze and then if you bind the legs
back legs of the Rat and you put its
rear end on a wheeled Chariot it will
Propel itself through the maze on the
wheels and obviously it didn't learn
that reflexively because there aren't
that many wheeled rats and they just
don't have that kind of experience and
so the rat's perfectly capable of
modifying what it learned in this
hypothetically deterministic manner to
to react to an entirely different set of
challenges and come up with exactly the
same solution it was an old behaviorist
joke that under controlled laboratory
conditions an animal will do exactly
what it damn well pleases and I like
that very much and the problem with the
Behavior's theory of stimulus response
was the axiomatic presupposition that
the stimulus was given that you just
look at the world and there's the
stimulus right in front of you that
takes no effort and you merely respond
reflexively to it and that's so wrong
that it's almost done incalculable
because it turns out that perceiving the
world is so complex
that in some real sense not only do we
not know how we do it but it looks
impossible and part of the reason that
it's impossible and this is why
this is again why empiricism is an
incomplete uh theoretical account of the
Genesis of knowledge is that there are
literally literally or close enough to
literally an infinite number of ways to
look at anything
and that's because everything is not
only complex and of itself
at the microcosmic level almost Beyond
imagination
but that everything is also situated in
a context which is actually a
determining element of the nature of the
thing and the context expanded enough
actually takes everything into account
and so
that makes perception a very weird
phenomenon
for another reason I I was always amused
for example when when I traveled with my
family when I was young on our summer
vacations we used to do things like get
out and look at the border between
Canada and the United States
and that's a very weird thing to do
because you can actually do it and you
can step across it and people treat that
as if it's magic in some sense because
part of us knows that that border is not
there
right it's not a part of the objective
world and yet
well and yet it is because there you are
standing beside it and then if you look
at aerial views you can see the farmer's
fields and exactly where the border is
and so things like borders between
countries have inhabit this weird space
between the objective and the subjective
that's a magic space and it actually
turns out that almost everything we
perceive has that degree of magicality
about it I thought also about such
things as people's proclivity to go to
museums maybe in Nashville for example
or Memphis to go look at Elvis Presley's
guitar and you think well what exactly
are you looking at when you go look at
Elvis Presley's guitar because first of
all it's a mass-produced guitar and so
why not just look at another guitar and
you think well that's not the same thing
it's like well why isn't it the same
thing because it's not
and the reason is is that the guitar is
not merely something and this is the
thing you perceive it's not merely
something made up of the guitar atoms
let's say in the guitar molecules it's
also an artifact that was embedded in a
context across a period of time and that
embeddedness of that artifact is part of
what you perceive when you see an
artifact like a celebrity something a
celebrity owned or the relic of a saint
let's say and so and you can say well
that's all an overlay on top of
perception and that would be fine except
that's wrong there's no data so to speak
that support that Viewpoint that's not
how perception Works perception is
unbelievably complicated
so we see regularities of being and some
of those impediments and affordances is
the technical term we tend to perceive
as objects but we also see the
possibilities of being but the problem
with that is that the world of objects
potentially relevant objects and the
world of possibility is vast beyond our
comprehension and so then we have
another problem that emerges as a
consequence of that which is a key and
signal problem and the fact that it has
been solved precipitously and carelessly
hastily is actually the reason for the
culture War that's raging today and that
is that
we have to prioritize our perceptions
to get access to the sense data that
hypothetically informs us we have to see
the world through a system of value and
why would I say a system of value well a
system of value is a system of
priorities right because to Value
something is to make it more important
than other things that it's being
compared to and
why do you need a hierarchy of
perceptual priority in order to see and
the answer is well you can't say
everything at once
and so you can only see one thing at a
time
and which thing and the answer is the
thing you think is most important to see
at that moment and then the question is
well and this is the question why is
that the most important thing to see at
the moment so imagine this is true in
the auditory domain in the tactile
domain all sensory domains and the
you think that perception is a passive
action and that we act upon the
consequences of our perception and this
is just not true at all there's no level
of the analysis of perception
neurophysiologically where you can
separate action from perception so for
example when you're looking at the world
although you don't know this your eyes
are moving back and forth very very
quickly they have to move if they stop
moving for more than a tenth of a second
you go blind because you saturate the
neurons that are you're using to
perceive so intensely with the
repetitive stimulation that they just
shut down and so at a micro level your
eyes are vibrating like mad and then
there are cicads above that that are
still unconscious that are less rapid
and wider and then voluntarily you have
voluntary eye fields in the frontal
cortex you move your eyes voluntarily to
point to what you want to see and you do
that because the center part of your
vision is exceptionally high resolution
each
Center Vision fovial neuron is connected
directly to 10 000 neurons at the
primary in the primary visual cortex and
then each of those ten thousand is
connected to another ten thousand it's
very expensive neural physiological real
estate and if all of your vision was as
intensely high resolution as your phobia
which is a very small part of your
retina you'd have to have a brain like
an alien because half your brain at any
given moment especially for human beings
is actually taken up with the problem of
resolving the world into conscious
vision and that's all motorically
dependent and so in some sense real
sense
seeing is very much akin to feeling out
your you know if you're investigating
the structure of something like this
column if you close your eyes you can
build a visual image of the column blind
people by the way many of them can draw
just so you know even if they've been
blind from birth because they present
they they generate visual
representations of the world they just
don't have light and color but they
still have the sense of the
three-dimensional structure of the world
they know what the shape of objects are
they know they can see their loved ones
Faces by using their hands as eyes
and we use our eyes as hands as well
because we feel out the world with our
hands or with our eyes so
so don't be thinking that it's passive
perception and then an overlay of
prioritization and action the problem of
prioritization goes all the way down to
the micro level with regards to
perception okay so now you have to
prioritize your perceptions why there's
too many things to look at and you can't
look at everything at once and so then
the question is well how do you
prioritize your perceptions
and the answer is well you make one
thing at every moment that actually
allows you to act even to move your eyes
even in a restaurant to focus in on the
conversation that your first date is
having with you as opposed to all the
other conversations that are going on
around you that's all dependent on motor
action in the auditory perception system
to prioritize what you're seeing
indicates that you exist within a
hierarchy of value why a hierarchy well
because
everything has to exist in your
perceptual structure in relationship to
everything else and so
well let's take the example of the date
why are you listening to what your new
potential partner is saying rather than
the background conversations you might
say well
I want to hear what she has to say well
and then you might ask well why and you
might say well I want to be polite and
you you might say why well I like this
girl and I would like to explore the
possibility of a relationship why well
because I believe that having a
relationship with someone is valuable
and that's a subset of the notion that
having relationships is valuable and
that's a subset of the notion perhaps of
having stable long-term loving
monogamous relationships are the highest
form of relationship and that's a subset
of the notion that well as you progress
through life one of the things you do is
find a partner and establish a family
and perhaps have children and contribute
to the community in that way and that's
part of being a good citizen let's say
and that's part of being a good person
and then
that there's an outside nesting of that
too because one question might be well
what do you mean to be a good person and
of course that's the problem of the
logos and the answer to that would be
something like well I want to be the
proper mediator between possibility and
actuality such that the best possible
actuality can be manifested by the
possibility that I confront and every
bloody thing you do everything you see
is either nested in a unified hierarchy
like that
or it's not
so let's say what happens if it's not
well we actually know what happens if
it's not and let's say you're not
unified
psychologically in your value
orientation okay what's the consequence
well entropy
that's the first consequence it's like
are you doing one thing which you know
what you're doing and can commit
yourself to and can actually undertake
or are you so confused that you need to
do 15 things at the same time and you
don't know which of them is most
important and the importance by the way
is diluted by the multiplicity right
because if you pick something out it's
singularly important you actually
elevate it as important if 15 things all
of a sudden become equally important
they're all 115th as important because
if they weren't you wouldn't have a
problem sequencing them and that means
they're not motivating
so one of the consequences of that is
that
there's no positive emotion
because positive emotion The Joy there's
there's a couple of types of positive
motion I won't talk about satiation but
enthusiasm and joy happiness let's say
is 100 depend dependent as far as we can
tell on observations that you're
progressing towards a valued goal it's
not attainment focused that's satiation
you get something you want and you're
satisfied about it that's a whole
different neurochemical system but
enthusiasm and joy that people associate
with happiness manifest itself when
you're moving towards a valued goal so
if you don't prioritize your goals
because you don't exist within a
structure of value then you have no
positive emotion
and positive emotion is half of forward
moving motivation well in fact in terms
of forward movement it's almost all the
motivation because the embodied
manifestation of positive emotion is the
movement towards a valued goal that's
what it is that's why you have the
positive emotion because you are a
creature that can move towards goals and
the emotional signaling of that is
positive emotion no goal no positive
emotion no hierarchy of goals dilution
or eradication of positive motion
because if you're confused enough and
you have a hundred goals and you can't
prioritize them then every goal has one
percent of the significance necessary to
really move you forward and so to be
maximally motivated you need to know why
you're doing what you're doing all the
way up Jacob's Ladder all the way up and
that brings us to the notion of the
macrocosm that's the Heavenly hierarchy
and in some sense it's a psychological
macrocosm although not in all senses
because it brings Society into the
purview
so
so here's a here's a proposition any
system of priorities
is a structure of values
so you may or may not accept the
proposition that you have to
hierarchically arrange your perceptions
you also by the way have to do the same
thing on the action front because if
you're inclined to do 10 things at once
you can do none and Consciousness by the
way is a very narrow channel and we
generally can only concentrate on one
thing at a time and the reason for that
in some sense is because we can only act
out one thing at a time and so not only
do you have to prioritize your
perceptions which are action based
anyways you also have to prioritize what
you're going to do because you have to
do the first thing first and then the
second thing and the third thing and
that's obviously a structure of priority
and the structure of priority is the
structure of comparative value and a
hierarchical structure of comparative
value is an ethic
and so what that means as far as I can
tell
and this is something if it's true is
that we cannot see the world except
through an ethic
and I mean that literally as well as
metaphorically you literally cannot see
the world or act in it
you cannot perceive the world except
through a structure a hierarchy a
hierarchical structure of value which is
an ethic and so then I would say it
here's something else to chew on for
like 20 years a story
is a verbal description of a hierarchy
of perceptual and action prioritization
and the reason that we're so attracted
to stories is because it's so difficult
to perceive and act in the world that
we're hungry at the level of soul for a
narrative that represents to us a
hierarchical ethos that we could embody
as a model for emulation
and so that's what our stories are their
Mortals the ritual models for emulation
most fundamentally and
the anti-hero story well that's easy
enough to contend with it's like
watch this person who ends up in
catastrophe and hell and do the opposite
of whatever it is they're doing and so
that's a powerful lesson because there's
something very compelling as we said
before about very powerful negative
emotion and so uh even if you don't
believe in heaven you might be able to
conjure up a belief in hell and if you
can't I would say well you're either not
using your imagination or you're hiding
or so far you're just lucky but I
wouldn't expect that to last and so you
can certainly see the catastrophe and
even the hellish catastrophe beckoning
and you might think plotting a route
that would make that the least likely
seems to be a good idea and so part of
the reason that we're fascinated by
villains and super villains for that
example or part of the reason we're
fascinated and endlessly so with figures
like Lucifer and Satan is because we're
attempting to flesh out the nature of
the antithesis to the worst kind of
hierarchy of values
and that's gripping to us it's gripping
to us now there's more to it as well
because we also will turn our attention
to the negative to fortify ourselves
against the negative in preparation for
confrontation with the negative and so
we can do that through use of fiction
and that's what we're doing for example
at least in part when we do such strange
things as amuse ourselves with horror
films and so
any system of priorities is a structure
of values that's an ethic it's
hierarchical because one thing has to be
put before many things and things have
to be done in sequence and everything
has to proceed in some sense in an
intelligible manner towards the highest
possible goal and the alternative to
that is not only the radical unhappiness
that already described which is the
destruction of any possibility of
enthusiastic engagement with life in a
meaningful Sense on the positive front
but the other price you pay for being
confused about your ethic is anxiety
most particularly anxiety because
anxiety is actually a signal of entropy
in perception and action if you don't
know what you're doing
you don't know where you are and you
don't know where you're going and if
you're in a place where you don't and
you don't know where you are or where
you're going you're in danger
because that's unmapped territory and
God only knows what lurks in unmapped
territory and you can think about that
biologically if you're somewhere you
don't understand and you don't know
where you're going well there's always
the possibility of predation but you can
think about it metaphysically too and
that's worthwhile if you're so confused
and disoriented that you don't know
where you are or where you're going
there are predators of the spirit who
are much worse than snakes that are
waiting in weight for you and the
probability that you'll move from
aimless hopeless joyless anxiety to
nihilism corrosive bitterness and
genocidal fantasy in the fundamental
extreme is very high and so that's
possession by a predator of the spirit
in the desert of the soul and that's
real
so a system of priorities is a structure
of values an ethic a narrative
and that would include a drama is the
description of a structure of values or
an ethic or a set of priorities
we see
and act out the world
through what wind described as a
narrative
now that's interesting that's an
interest if that's true it's very
interesting it's interesting partly
because you know the post-modernists who
I don't admire generally speaking they
figured this out they figured out that
we likely see the world through a story
and that that might even be true for
scientists is that a scientist and Carl
Jung believe this too by the way is that
science takes place within a surrounding
narrative now what the postmodernists
did the French post-modernists in
particular and then the Americans
through Yale most particularly
um they left from problem which was how
do we perceive solution we see the world
through a narrative two narrow solution
which is that we prioritize our
perceptions and our actions by imposing
A Narrative of power and dominance
and they swipe that from the marxists
and that is simply not true there is no
evidence for that animals don't even do
that in their social communities or or
when they do it they erect unstable and
extremely violent social hierarchies
there's no evidence whatsoever that
hierarchies predicated on a narrative of
power function productively even for the
people that impose The Narrative of
power people have objected to me well
what about dictators uh solid it's like
here's something to think about
imagine you set up something like hell
around you now we could think about
Soviet Union in that regard and you're a
minion in hell
you're not Stalin are you more
successful or less successful if you're
Stalin
I would say being the biggest devil in
the worst hell is actually the most
cataclysmic failure not a mark of the
success of your ethos of power and
dominance and the ethos that set up
against that is very complicated and it
is the ethos in some real sense of the
logos the logos is the antithesis to the
luciferian presumption of dominance and
power and it's it's harder to formulate
which is why we've been wrestling with
it and are doing that tonight as well in
this place where it's been wrestled with
forever it's harder to formulate it's
not uni-dimensional it's the it's the
union of multiple virtues
and so it's a tricky thing to grip and
it's so tricky that we don't have it
fully articulated and we've approached
it I would say through narrative and one
of the things I've come to realize about
the biblical narrative and this is what
I'm writing my next book about which is
called we who wrestle with God and I
suppose this lecture is a pre
uh per preview of that of the ideas in
that book
um
we characterize that which must exist at
the Pinnacle of the hierarchy of
attentional prioritization with the
characterization of the Divine in
narrative
he might say well what's Divine well we
could Define it technically Divine is
that which is deepest what's deepest
that which most other things depend on
that's a good definition of depth a deep
and profound piece of literature Milton
is the foundation stone for many
branches of literature there's many
literary products you can't understand
without understanding Milton and you
can't understand Milt without
understanding the Biblical Corpus which
is even deeper and in that sense more
profound given the metaphoric
relationship between the idea of
profundity and depth and the why is the
biblical Corpus deep well it's an
attempt to flesh out using narrative
characterization the nature of the
spirit that has to inhabit the highest
place in the hierarchy of attentional
and action priority and so why would I
say Spirit Well because it's an embodied
it's something embodied it's not a
description of the world it's a pattern
you enact and embody
and so when you're called to God and the
logos through the biblical Corpus you're
called to allow yourself to be possessed
by the spirit that represents the union
of
awe-inspiring imitatable virtues and
then you might say well what are those
and I can I can walk through some of
them just so you get a sense of this I
don't want to do it exhaustively
in the opening chapters of Genesis which
is where the idea of the logos is
highlighted above all else in some real
sense you have this notion that whatever
God is uses whatever the logos is to
extract habitable order from potential
and the tohuva bohu that's the chaos is
a weird intermingling in the linguistic
sense of chaotic possibility of the
world per se with confusion and
psychological disorientation
and so it's an amalgam that chaos and
it's it's the chaos you feel when a
plenitude of possibilities opens up in
front of you which is destabilizing and
psychologically challenging especially
if the purview of possibility is beyond
your ability to contend with but you can
see the massive possibility conjoined
with a sense of anxiety that's too much
possibility to bring order to that you
cast your attention upon it and you
prioritize it and God imposes a
benevolent order upon that chaotic
possibility extracts from that chaotic
possibility the habitable order that is
good and the reason that the habitable
order that's extracted is good is
because God uses the logos which is
something like a combination of
orientation towards the highest possible
good which you could think of as Love
and Truth and One Way of characterizing
the imitatable manifestation of the
logos is that it's the Nexus of love and
truth and I think it's truth embodied in
love or embedded in love with love being
superordinate
um
but that's a partial description and
it's disembodied and Abstract in some
sense and doesn't have the grip
necessary to compel you to act to
imitate and so what you see in the
biblical Corpus are continual
representations of the spirit that must
occupy the highest place in the
hierarchy of imitable
mimicable action
as
uh
a pattern that possesses your
perceptions and actions and calls you
into the world and so for example
in the story of
of uh Adam and Eve once Adam and Eve are
thrown out of the garden
because they become
prematurely self-conscious and prideful
in some real sense God is presented as
the spirit that you walk with when you
walk
unself-consciously in relationship to
the highest in the garden
and that's actually an experiential
reference as you imagine you're having a
particularly good day in a particularly
beautiful garden like the day we had
today it's like are you closer to God
well the answer is experientially well
yes because you feel you feel that your
existence is imbued with a deep sense of
appropriate significance that's not a
rational
secondarily derived argument it's
primary it's a primary experience and
part of what the biblical Corpus is
trying to do is to lay out the nature of
the spirit that inhabits you when you're
oriented towards the highest possible
good and to point out that that's
phenomenological it's experiential it's
existential it's embodied it's not a
secondary overlay of the description of
the nature of the world on the world
that's not what the biblical Corpus is
trying to do so in the story of Cain and
Abel what's God God is that which calls
you to make the appropriate sacrifices
and calls you on it when you don't
and try to escape that and see what
happens
we know perfectly well perfectly well
that that's a pathway to hell and you
might say I don't believe in hell and I
would say that means you don't know
anything
Noah what's who is God or what is God in
the story of Noah the spirit that calls
the wise to prepare in the face of
crisis
do you abide by that or not well you do
if you're wise and you do if you care
about the people around you Abraham
what's God the spirit that calls the
inappropriately
luxuriating out to the terrible
adventure of their life
and that then requires of them the
highest possible sacrifice to obtain the
highest possible goal
in Exodus what's God
the spirit that lays tyranny to waste
the spirit that guides you through the
desert of the Soul
the spirit that orients you towards the
promised land and abuse you with the
enthusiasm that allows you to make your
way out of the Tyranny and through the
desert
and so on in each story is
part of a circumamdulation a narrative
circumambulation that's attempting to
represent the union of Virtues that
could be embodied in perception and
action that constitute the Pinnacle of
the pyramid and that by the way pyramid
that's Mount Sinai that's the proper
hierarchical organization of society
that's the
aesthetic model for the construction of
the Ark of the Covenant it's all of that
simultaneously it's the Egyptian pyramid
with the gold cap the question is what's
the cap what's at the highest well that
is the mystery what should be placed in
the highest place we already said well
something better be because if nothing's
placed in the highest place
then there's nothing in the highest
place and what's the consequence of that
well to return to that theme
anomy anxiety
overwhelming dread
psychological destabilization and the
absence of joy and there is no escaping
from that except by solving the problem
but it's worse than that because this
hierarchy of perceptual prioritization
unites us socially so here we are in a
theater and we've seen many examples of
theaters today including the
amphitheater where it's a concentric
Circle
that focuses everyone's attention on the
same spectacle well that's the
definition of a culture is that
everyone's attention is focused on the
same spectacle and so the hierarchy of
perceptual prioritization and action
that unites you psychologically is also
the same
structure that unites us socially and so
that means the kingdom of God is within
and without simultaneously in some most
fundamental sense and you might say well
we don't need a superordinate ethic to
unite us and I would say okay then we're
not United
and so what are we if we're not United
and the answer is well we're A house
divided against itself and what's the
consequence of that everyone that's the
hobbesian nightmare right that's not the
noble savage that's the hobbsian
nightmare it's like you and I we cannot
play together we cannot focus our
attention on the same point and
cooperate and compete amicably
peacefully productively and generously
towards that point and that's not
nothing that's the death of God that's
the rise of nihilism that's the
emergence of a corrosive and
destabilizing and deep cynicism and it's
the death of joy and enthusiasm and so
we might say well what do we have in the
absence of God if God is the spirit that
animates us to action and perception in
relationship to the highest good and the
answer is we have the catastrophe of the
death of God that Nietzsche referred to
when he announced the death of God and
said simultaneously that we were the
murderer of all murderers
and that we would never find the water
to wash away the blood
and that is definitely the situation
we're in now and
and hopefully
hopefully
we'll all wake up enough at the
individual level
to play out that catastrophe of
valuelessness
within our own souls and render the
Judgment that's necessary upon each of
us in ourselves by our own voluntary
ascent
or we'll act out the failure to do that
in the external world
and that's the decision as far as I can
tell that in some real sense and maybe
in a sense that's more real than ever
before in the entire history of the
world even though this battle has been
playing out
eternally that's the choice that
confronts us now
I learned from Carl Jung he said after
the second World War
and the rise of weapons of mass
destruction that the fundamental danger
that confronts Humanity
is now psychological or spiritual in
part because we are so technologically
powerful that we cannot possibly survive
in the primitive ethical condition that
still obtains that are scientific and
descriptive capacity has expanded
immensely over the last 400 years to the
point where we're a planetary force of
creation and destruction but are ethical
Endeavor has to say the least languished
and you might
observe that children given dangerous
tools die
and so we have these dangerous tools and
that means as far as I can tell that we
better become the people that can wield
them with wisdom and that's going to
mean like it's always meant a return to
the source right a willingness to rescue
the dead father from the belly of the
Beast right a willingness to
make conscious the nature of our
hierarchy of perceptual priority let's
say and to understand that that's a
reality that might be superordinate to
what we normally and have been taught to
view as reality itself and that the
biblical notion that in some sense the
word is the precursor to being itself
actually turns out to be true and it's a
terrifying idea because it means in some
real sense and I also believe this to be
the case and I think it's also
reflective of the deep notion of the
logos what that means is that in some
Cosmic sense it's on you
and you know we have this notion that
human beings men and women alike are
formulated in the image of God in the
image of the logos and we believe that
and what do I mean by that well it's an
axiom of our laws it's an axiom of our
constitutional system certainly in a
country like Britain or or or America
any of the western democracies and to a
large degree any country that can
function at all there's the presumption
that each person is a locus of divine
value
and you think well do you want to live
in a society that assumes that or do you
want to live in a society that doesn't
and then you might also ask do you want
to have friends that assume that of you
or do you want to have friends that
don't and the same thing might apply to
the people that you love in your actions
towards them how are you treating them
if you treat them properly and I can't
see even speaking merely psychologically
that you can love someone and not treat
them in some most fundamental sense like
they're a Divine locus of value I think
those are the same thing and you can
crabble about the linguistic
representation necessary to derive that
conclusion but have it your way
you're going to act out your decisions
one way or another you're going to learn
in the world just exactly what attitude
you should bring to bear if you want to
elevate those around you and
simultaneously do the same to yourself
and you will find that if you do that to
the degree you do that you are treating
each person as if they're a Divine locus
of value and responsibility and that's a
terrifying thing too because
I read something once I don't remember
who said it that God is a circle whose
Center is everywhere and whose
circumference is nowhere and I read
commentaries on that idea indirectly
obliquely by Dostoevsky and social Nets
and Jung as well perhaps Above All Else
stating that
we are each a center of the world
we each have a cosmic role to play and
you can think about it this way and this
is a useful way to think about it you
have potential within you to match the
potential that's without let's say and
we all upgrade ourselves and call
ourselves out on our failure to manifest
that which was that which is within us
and so here's a proposition for you the
world is languishing to the degree that
you are not all you could be
and that could really be the truth
and to the degree that were made in the
image of God and made in the image of
logos and also the entity that has to
undergo the tragic death that's
represented by Christ and maybe the
encounter with hell that's part of the
story of the Resurrection that's us
that's what we face and so I'll conclude
my discussion of the characterization of
the spirit that occupies the Pinnacle of
the hierarchy of attentional priority
with the story of the passion which is
the full embracing of the catastrophe of
life
that's what it calls us to and religious
or not one thing you might notice is
that a good proportion of the entire
planet
has been obsessed with the figure of the
crucifixion and the story of the passion
for two thousand years and even as an
unbeliever whatever that means
you you have to take that seriously now
you can write it off as a delusion
Freud tried to do that and so did Marx
but you have to ask yourself well if
it's a delusion why didn't people pick
just something happy to look at instead
of something utterly Dreadful and I say
utterly Dreadful because and this is the
truth as far as I can tell
what the passion is is a distillation of
tragedy
so imagine that in order to contend with
your life you have to be willing to
embrace its darkest elements you might
say why and I'd say well hey the darkest
elements are there and they're coming
and if you're not prepared they're going
to
it's going to be far worse than it has
to be at minimum and maybe it'll just
lead to your destruction in ways that
are worse than death
and that's a high probability and so in
order to live
fully
you have to confront life
fully and that means you have to accept
the unjust sacrifice of the innocent in
some real sense and that's you and
that's not even enough you see in the
Christian passion why is it the ultimate
tragedy well tragedy is
undeserved catastrophe
let's say
well then you amplify the catastrophe
youthful death torturous death
death with foreknowledge
humiliating death death at the hands of
the mob death as a consequence of
betrayal death
in the in the purview of your mother's
vision
death despite your innocence
death despite your moral virtue death
despite the moral virtue that you have
that everyone knows about
and recognizes and still sentences you
to death death at the hand of a tyrant
death at the hand of a nihilist
and then that's not enough because in
the cloud of myth that surrounds the
characterization of the embodied logos
and that's Christ
following the radical acceptance of
death is the radical confrontation with
hell and that's the harrowing of hell
and the story there says in order to
open yourself up maximally to the
possibilities of life not only do you
have to contend with the tragedy of your
own innocent sacrifice and be on board
with that fully or pay the price but you
have to confront the Gates of Hell
itself and you might say well what does
that mean and you know our culture has
been obsessed in principle since the end
of the second world war with what
happened in Nazi Germany and that's as
good an example of hell as anything that
could be presented to the Corpus of
unbelievers who disavow any recognition
of hell and if what happened in the Nazi
death camps isn't enough hell for you uh
then I would suggest that you update
your prioritization of perception and
value because it was certain it's
certainly enough hell to be convincing
if you look at it thoroughly
you know one of the things I tried to do
when I studied the Holocaust and also
the events in the gulag was to put
myself in the position not of the victim
and certainly not of the heroic rescuer
but of the perpetrator and with a bit of
meditation you can discover pretty damn
rapidly that you could be a perfectly
effective torturing Auschwitz Camp guard
and that's a hell of a thing to contend
with and I would say in some real sense
that's worse than contending with death
and I would also say that if you don't
do it you cannot
stop it
if you're unwilling to see the part of
you and that's a luciferian part in the
most fundamental sense if you're
unwilling to face that
to the degree that you're unwilling to
face that
that's the spirit that possesses you
and in a world like our world that is
not something that we can continue to do
and get away with it
so we're all called together here at
Ephesus which is quite remarkable for us
all to be here and what are we called to
do wake up
we have a moral burden to bear and
that's the adventure of our life that's
the other thing so interesting about the
abrahamic story is that God calls
Abraham out of his luxurious Slumber and
sends them into a catastrophe tyranny
starvation War brutal but he has the
adventure of his life
you might say well the it's the
adventure of your life that justifies
the catastrophe of your life
it's not some simple minded juvenile
Hedonism or desire for Comfort that's
all what we're built for
we're built for the adventure of Our
Lives
and where do you find that
you find that in orienting yourself to
the highest possible good in all ways
and speaking the truth forthrightly
along that pathway
thank you very much
join me again in thanking Dr Peterson
for joining us tonight